# Image

## Formats

### GIF

Max 8 bit colors.

Lossless compressed.

Obsolete.

Associated with the web: huge browser support.

Can contain multiple images to make very short videos.

To create a GIF from multiple images or vice versa use ImageMagick `convert`.

### PNG

Lossless compression, alpha layer, wide software support.

Best format for non-vector lossless.

Interlacing: if yes, the image is streamed in random order with added pixel position information

This is useful for slow data channels like the Internet, so that when the browser loads it, pixels load all over, and not from top to bottom.

This increases the size of the image, since it is then necessary to keep bit position information.

### APNG

Animated PNG! Works on Firefox. Goodbye GIF.

Sample: <http://people.mozilla.org/~dolske/apng/demo.html>

### JPG

Lossy, good compression/quality loss ratio, wide software support.

Best format for non vector lossy.

Amount to lose can be controlled to increase compression.

Algorithm: removes high frequencies of the image's 2D Fourier transform.

### SVG

Vector, XML based, non-compressed.

Standard developed by W3C, so the format is closely linked to the web and browsers. Latest version: <http://www.w3.org/TR/SVG/>. Can be styled by separate CSS style sheets.

Image is described by mathematical formulas, not bits, therefore it is potentially tiny if the image is mathematically simple and the description is perfect (to floating point precision), which allows for example for infinite zoom.

Cannot however describe photos from real life in general (there are attempts to convert photos to vector, but they are far from usable). it is basically used for images which were generated by the computer without a huge number of lines such as graphs.

Render size may be higher though, but at least over the Internet this is countered by the matters less because bandwidth is a bottleneck.

Reasonable browser support and increasing.

### BMP

Bit by bit, no compression.

Specified by Microsoft.

### TIF

Lossless or lossy, in practice lossless applications only.

## Get info on image

- `file $f`: type, and for certain formats size other major parameters such as depth.
- ImageMagick `identify -format $f`

## Editors

[Gimp](gimp.md).

### Inkscape

Good SVG GUI editor.

### Dia

GNOME diagram editor

## Viewers

### eog

Eyes of GNOME.

Lightweight image viewer:

    eog a.jpg

### img2txt

Convert image to ASCII art.

caca-utils package.

Stdout output:

    img2txt a.jpg
    img2txt -W `tput cols` a.jpg

- `-W`: width

#### caca view

`img2text` on X window:

    cacaview a.pjg

### aview

Converts image to ASCII art! Not as good as `img2txt`.

Works only with Netpbm formats.

Seems to do black and white only:

    asciiview a.jpg

And changing the width was not working for me:

    asciiview -width a.jpg

## Utilities

[ImageMagick](imagemagick.md)

### ExactImage

ImageMagick competitor, supposedly faster. C++ template API.

### caca-utils

Contains `img2txt`.

### dvipng

Convert DVI to PNG.

Important application: LaTeX -> DVI -> PNG -> website.

## Misc

### Color spaces

- <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SRGB>

- <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HSL_and_HSV>
