% title
% author
% date

cheatsheet on pandoc's markdown

# sources

great documentation page:

``` {.bash}
    man pandoc_markdown
```

if its there, it might not be here!

# header 1

## header 2

### header 3

# paragraph

paragraph 1

paragraph 2

## toc

to get a table linked of contents, use the `--toc` option
this gives ids based on name to the headers (strips illegal chars,
transforms spaces into hyphens)

## attributes {#attr .class1 .class2}

you can give explicit attributes to headers like this one

explicit ids will override automatic ids that would be generted by ``toc``

only the id has effect in latex (becomes a label), other don't even show in html for me...

according to docs it should also be possible to add arbitrary attributes of type a=b,
byt this breaks the header for me...

# list

A list:

- ul 1
- ul 2

Must have blank line after last paragraph:
- this is not an item
- neither is this

##### no need for a blank line after last header
- ul 1
- ul 2

but don't do this, it confusing and hard to read.

## ordered

#. a
#. a
#. a

1) a
2) a
3) a

(1) a
(2) a
(3) a

1. a
2. a
3. a

<!-- -->

2. a
1. a
3. a

## example list

### no tag

(@) no tag. a bit useless.

a paragraph

(@) no tag. a bit useless.

must be at start of line to work: (@)

###  tagged

(@tag1) text of tag1

ref to tag1: (@tag1)

(@tag2) text of tag2

ref to tag1: (@tag1)

(@tag1) <-- cannot start line directly with reference. It will be treated as a list item.

# links

basic: [text](destination)

automatic: <link>. You *must* use the angular brackets
even if some versions of markdown allow you to ommit them such as github's.

inner id: [text](#links). Also works in latex!

## label

label definitions can go anywhere and it won't show:

[label-name]: label-dest

however it is good practice to put them all at the end

use **square** brackets instead of parenthesis: [text][label-name]

also works implicitly: [label-name][]

you can also link to: [header links generated by ``toc``][label]

but not if you gave an explicit label to it: [broken][label2], [broken][label3]

### label2 {#label3}

## relative link between different files

possible:

[readme.html](readme.html)

[readme.pdf](readme.pdf)

[readme](readme)

the problem is that you have to give the output extension here (html/pdf)
and AFAIK there is no cross ouptut way to do do this.

TODO new feature

# code block

Inline: `*this is inline code*`

Inline backtick: `` ` ``

Inline double backtick: ``` `` ```

Inline with attributes: `a = 1 if True else 2`{#inline-with-attrs .python a="b"}

Indented:

    this is a block
    it can contain many lines

Must have blank line after last paragraph:
    this is not a block
    because it does not have a blank line before last paragraph

Can have a paragraph afterwards without blank line:

    code block
paragraph after code block without blank line. Don't do this tough: it confusing and hard to read.

Delimited code block with tildes:

~~~
import os

def f(a):
    print a

f("abc")
~~~

with backticks:

```
import os

def f(a):
    print a

f("abc")
```

I prefer backticks for analogy with inline blocks. It is less readable tough.

Give attributes:

```{#id .python .numberLines startFrom="100"}
import os

def f(a):
    print a

f("abc")
```

Language shortcut:

~~~python
import os

def f(a):
    print a

f("abc")
~~~

# math

Inline: $x^2$

Firs chars after first dollar and before lats one must not be space: $ x^2$ $x^2 $ $ x^2 $

## latex

is ignored on html output, so don't use it.

$$x^2$$

\begin{equation}
    x^2
\end{equation}

# escaping stuff

\#

\*a*

\[a](b)

\`a`

\```

\```

# html

only works for html output, not for pdf, so never use it unless you really need it and can break pdf.

<p>par</p>

<p>par</p>

<ul>
    <li>item</li>
</ul>

## inner content is md parsed:

<p>**par**</p>

##comments

there is no real good way AFAIK

a good possibility is:

<!-- comment -->
