% title
% author
% date

Cheatsheet on Pandoc's markdown.

# Front matter

Pandoc uses a limited front matter that can only contain a few fields:

    % title
    % author
    % date

# TOC

To get a table linked of contents, use the `--toc` option this gives ids based on name to the headers (strips illegal chars, transforms spaces into hyphens).

# Attributes {#attr .class1 .class2}

You can give explicit attributes to headers like this one.

Explicit IDs will override automatic ids that would be generated by `toc`.

Only the id has effect in LaTeX (becomes a label), other don't even show in HTML.

According to docs it should also be possible to add arbitrary attributes of type a=b, but this currently breaks the header.

# Tags

Named references, much like traditional Math equation references.

## no tag

(@) no tag. a bit useless.

a paragraph

(@) no tag. a bit useless.

must be at start of line to work: (@)

## tagged

(@tag1) text of tag1

Ref to tag1: (@tag1)

(@tag2) text of tag2

Ref to tag1: (@tag1)

(@tag1) <-- cannot start line directly with reference. It will be treated as a list item.

# Ordered lists

Pandoc understands many ordered list formats. Insane.

# . a
# . a

1) a
2) a
3) a

(1) a
(2) a
(3) a

# Code blocks

Extra code block formats. Insane.

~~~
import os

def f(a):
    print a

f("abc")
~~~

Two backticks:

``
import os

def f(a):
    print a

f("abc")
``

# Math

Inline: $x^2$

Display on a single line:

$$x^2$$

Firs chars after first dollar and before lats one must not be space: $ x^2$ $x^2 $ $ x^2 $

Multiline and align:

$$
\begin{aligned}
a + b & = c     \\
    d & = e + f \\
\end{aligned}
$$

Must use double dollars `$$`!

# raw latex

Raw LaTeX is ignored on HTML output:

\begin{equation}
    x^2
\end{equation}

Remove page number from a single page document: add the following line to the top:

    % A pdf file without page numbers created from pandoc markdown
    % sieste
    % June 2013

    \pagenumbering{gobble}

    # First header

    etc

# raw HTML

Ignored for PDF output:

<p>raw HTML</p>

# Markdown inside raw HTML

<p>**markdown bold in raw HTML**</p>
